docs: enhance Proxy Metrics documentation. (#5568)
envoyproxy/gateway: site/content/en/latest/tasks/observability/proxy-metric.md

title: "Proxy Metrics"
---

Envoy Gateway provides observability for the ControlPlane and the underlying EnvoyProxy instances.
This task show you how to config proxy metrics.
Envoy Gateway offers observability for both the Control Plane and the underlying Envoy Proxy instances.
This task shows you how to configure proxy metrics.

## Prerequisites

> {{< boilerplate o11y_prerequisites >}}

Author: Nested boilerplate renderes inconsistent design. It might create some text duplication though.

## Current Renders (see the double lines)
<img width="935" alt="Screenshot 2025-03-21 at 1 45 47 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1c33a6f2-7c31-4563-ad07-b89659ef8943" />

## Proposed

<img width="925" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c14325bd-fd2b-4398-8b0a-a21286fe8da1" />

Reviewer: looks great !

Reviewer 2: this's a common issue, maybe it was introuduced in last refactor.
cc @missBerg

Reviewer 2: xref: https://github.com/envoyproxy/gateway/pull/5604

```shell
export ENVOY_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n envoy-gateway-system --selector=gateway.envoyproxy.io/owning-gateway-namespace=default,gateway.envoyproxy.io/owning-gateway-name=eg -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl port-forward pod/$ENVOY_POD_NAME -n envoy-gateway-system 19001:19001
```

View the metrics:

```shell
curl localhost:19001/stats/prometheus  | grep "default/backend/rule/0"
```

To disable the Prometheus metric endpoint, set the `telemetry.metrics.prometheus.disable` to true in the 
_EnvoyProxy CRD_ as shown in the following command.

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: eg
spec:
  controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
  parametersRef:
    group: gateway.envoyproxy.io
    kind: EnvoyProxy
    name: prometheus
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
---
apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
kind: EnvoyProxy
metadata:
  name: prometheus
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      prometheus:
        disable: true
EOF
```

> If you are only using the OpenTelemetry sink, you might want to remove the Prometheus resources from the 

Reviewer: can we combine this in L67 instead - " ......set disabled to true. This may be useful when you are only using the OpenTelemetry sink"

Author: updated

monitoring namespace. Set the `prometheus.enabled` Helm value to `false` to disable Prometheus components.

```shell
helm upgrade eg-addons oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-addons-helm --version v0.0.0-latest -n monitoring --set prometheus.enabled=false 
```

### OpenTelemetry Metrics

Envoy Gateway can export metrics to an OpenTelemetry sink. Use the following command to send metrics to the 
OpenTelemetry Collector. Ensure that the OpenTelemetry components are enabled, 
as mentioned in the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites).

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: eg
spec:
  controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
  parametersRef:
    group: gateway.envoyproxy.io
    kind: EnvoyProxy
    name: otel-sink
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
---
apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
kind: EnvoyProxy
metadata:
  name: otel-sink
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      sinks:
        - type: OpenTelemetry
          openTelemetry:
            host: otel-collector.monitoring.svc.cluster.local
            port: 4317
EOF
```

> Verify OTel-Collector metrics:

Author: I couldn't get this step to work in my environment. When I try to access `localhost:19001/metrics`, I receive the following error:
```bash
Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:19001 -> 9000
Forwarding from [::1]:19001 -> 9000
Handling connection for 19001
E0321 01:06:54.145499 38433 portforward.go:424] "Unhandled Error" err="an error occurred forwarding 19001 -> 9000: error forwarding port 9000 to pod f90e62112405273c19bfdfcaabf573a2bf03516a80ec84e2f25637ece8aaa8c9, uid : failed to execute portforward in network namespace "/var/run/netns/cni-0d155390-a9cd-70c5-7184-c52e57222874": failed to connect to localhost:9000 inside namespace "f90e62112405273c19bfdfcaabf573a2bf03516a80ec84e2f25637ece8aaa8c9", IPv4: dial tcp4 127.0.0.1:9000: connect: connection refused IPv6 dial tcp6 [::1]:9000: connect: connection refused"
error: lost connection to pod
```

Reviewer: cc @zirain

Reviewer: looks like the steps to enable Otel using `EnvoyProxy.Spec.Telemetry.Metrics` is missing here

Author: As [seen here](https://github.com/envoyproxy/gateway/blob/d75d43708124523ecea48ce1d2e029bbd7fba4e6/charts/gateway-addons-helm/values.yaml#L298-L300), OTEL metrics are exported for Prometheus to scrape. To view these metrics via command line, we need to target the pod that's collecting the metrics, which is located in the `envoy-gateway-system` namespace instead of the `monitoring` namespace.

So, Instead of:
```bash
export OTEL_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n monitoring --selector=app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-collector -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl port-forward pod/$OTEL_POD_NAME -n monitoring 19001:19001
```
We have to do, 
```bash
export ENVOY_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n envoy-gateway-system --selector=app.kubernetes.io/instance=eg,app.kubernetes.io/name=gateway-helm -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl port-forward pod/$ENVOY_POD_NAME -n envoy-gateway-system 19001:19001
```
After that, we can access the `curl http://localhost:19001/metrics` endpoint and see metrics.

Reviewer 2: `--selector=app.kubernetes.io/instance=eg,app.kubernetes.io/name=gateway-helm` this's not right, I think this should be the pod of `envoy-gateway`.

Envoy send metrics with OTel sinks to OTel-collector, the collector will expose it with following configuration:
```
metrics:
          exporters:
            - prometheus
          receivers:
            - datadog
            - otlp
```

Reviewer 2: I would say that it's not the right approch, we're trying to verift OTel sink for dataplane not the controller.

Author: We can view metrics in the OTEL pod logs if we enable `debug` exporter. Updated the PR with that approach. Let me know if this approach looks good.

> ```bash
> helm upgrade eg-addons oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-addons-helm --version {{< helm-version >}} -n monitoring --reuse-values --set opentelemetry-collector.config.service.pipelines.metrics.exporters='{debug,prometheus}'
> export OTEL_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n monitoring --selector=app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-collector -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
> kubectl logs -n monitoring -f $OTEL_POD_NAME --tail=100
> ```

kubectl port-forward service/prometheus -n monitoring 19001:$PROMETHEUS_PORT
```

Query metrics using Prometheus API:

```shell
curl -s 'http://localhost:19001/api/v1/query?query=topk(1,envoy_cluster_upstream_cx_connect_ms_sum)' | jq . 
```

To directly view the metrics in Prometheus format from the Envoy's `/stats/prometheus` 
[admin endpoint](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/operations/admin), follow the steps below.

```shell
export ENVOY_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n envoy-gateway-system --selector=gateway.envoyproxy.io/owning-gateway-namespace=default,gateway.envoyproxy.io/owning-gateway-name=eg -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl port-forward pod/$ENVOY_POD_NAME -n envoy-gateway-system 19001:19001
```

View the metrics:

```shell
curl localhost:19001/stats/prometheus  | grep "default/backend/rule/0"
```

If you are only using the OpenTelemetry sink, you might want to set the `telemetry.metrics.prometheus.disable` to `true`
in the _EnvoyProxy CRD_ as shown in the following command.

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1

> kind: GatewayClass

Reviewer: can we link this to the `Gateway` instead of `GatewayClass` since thats a more common approach

metadata:
  name: eg
spec:
  controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
  parametersRef:
    group: gateway.envoyproxy.io
    kind: EnvoyProxy
    name: prometheus
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
---
apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
kind: EnvoyProxy
metadata:
  name: prometheus
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      prometheus:
        disable: true
EOF
```

To completely remove Prometheus resources from the cluster, set the `prometheus.enabled` Helm value to `false`.

```shell
helm upgrade eg-addons oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-addons-helm --version {{< helm-version >}} -n monitoring --set prometheus.enabled=false 
```

### OpenTelemetry Metrics

Envoy Gateway can export metrics to an OpenTelemetry sink. Use the following command to send metrics to the 
OpenTelemetry Collector. Ensure that the OpenTelemetry components are enabled, 
as mentioned in the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites).

```yaml

> cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -

Reviewer: can we use tabs here ? https://github.com/envoyproxy/gateway/blob/953ccc15764086b225c7bd117f0b25d29f903f18/site/content/en/v1.3/tasks/traffic/direct-response.md?plain=1#L17

Author: Updated with a similar approach now.

apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1

> kind: GatewayClass

Reviewer: same as https://github.com/envoyproxy/gateway/pull/5568/files#r2015153760

  name: eg
spec:
  controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
  parametersRef:
    group: gateway.envoyproxy.io
    kind: EnvoyProxy
    name: otel-sink
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
---
apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
kind: EnvoyProxy
metadata:
  name: otel-sink
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      sinks:
        - type: OpenTelemetry
          openTelemetry:
            host: otel-collector.monitoring.svc.cluster.local
            port: 4317
EOF
```

Temporarily enable the `debug` exporter in the OpenTelemetry Collector 
to view metrics in the pod logs using the following commands:

```shell
helm upgrade eg-addons oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-addons-helm --version {{< helm-version >}} -n monitoring --reuse-values --set opentelemetry-collector.config.service.pipelines.metrics.exporters='{debug,prometheus}'

```

To view the logs of the OpenTelemetry Collector, use the following command:

```shell
export OTEL_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n monitoring --selector=app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-collector -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl logs -n monitoring -f $OTEL_POD_NAME --tail=100

> ```

Reviewer: can we add a Next Steps similar to check out https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/docs/tasks/observability/grafana-integration/ (we'll need to link the file / relative path instead)

  listeners:
    - name: http
      protocol: HTTP
      port: 80
---
apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
kind: EnvoyProxy
metadata:
  name: otel-sink
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      sinks:
        - type: OpenTelemetry
          openTelemetry:
            host: otel-collector.monitoring.svc.cluster.local
            port: 4317
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabpane >}}

Temporarily enable the `debug` exporter in the OpenTelemetry Collector 
to view metrics in the pod logs using the following command. Debug exporter is enabled for demonstration purposes and
should not be used in production.

```shell
helm upgrade eg-addons oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-addons-helm --version {{< helm-version >}} -n monitoring --reuse-values --set opentelemetry-collector.config.service.pipelines.metrics.exporters='{debug,prometheus}'

```

To view the logs of the OpenTelemetry Collector, use the following command:

```shell
export OTEL_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n monitoring --selector=app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-collector -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl logs -n monitoring -f $OTEL_POD_NAME --tail=100

```

## Next Steps

> Checkout [Visualising metrics using Grafana](./grafana-integration.md) to visualise the metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out [Visualising metrics using Grafana](./grafana-integration.md) to visualise the metrics.
```
